Recent studies have reported that connected impervious areas – those impervious surfaces that contribute directly to runoff in a storm network or stream – are a better indicator of hydrologic response, stream alteration, and water quality than total impervious area.  Distributed stormwater controls, if sited appropriately, can help meet stormwater goals and reduce impervious connectivity.  However, most methods for quantifying connected impervious areas require major assumptions regarding the definition of ‘connection’, potentially over-simplifying the role of variable climates, slope gradients, soils conditions, and heterogeneous flow paths on impervious surface connectivity.  This study presents a new conceptual model and method for extracting connected impervious areas that explicitly considers the effect of landscape and storm variability. The model separates impervious surfaces into three categories: directly or physically connected (Aphys), variably connected (Avar) (impervious that drains to pervious) and rooftop areas (Aroof). Of these categories, we investigated the sensitivity of Avar connectivity to varying soil conditions, slope gradients, rainfall properties, and hillslope geometry using PySWMM (the python API for SWMM5). Simulations spanned a large parameter space with varying soil, slope, rainfall properties and geometries (i.e., relationships between the impervious and downslope pervious areas). PySWMM simulations were used to train and test a regression tree that predicts infiltration and connectivity of runoff from Avar surfaces.   The regression tree provides excellent fidelity with PySWMM outcomes, and analysis of the regression feature importance shows Avar connectivity is highly sensitive to the downslope pervious area soil type and pervious area fraction.  To enable use of these methods in practice, we developed an ArcGIS tool that (1) extracts the impervious surface categories Aphys, Avar, and Aroof, (2) applies the regression tree algorithm to predict the fraction of incident rainfall that produces runoff across Avar, (3) estimates the fraction of incident rainfall that produces runoff  from Aphys and Aroof, and (4) summarizes the resulting connected impervious areas by subcatchment.  The methods developed in this study can be used to more accurately identify impervious surface connectivity in urban watersheds, representing an important step forward for incorporating spatial heterogeneity in stormwater modeling and planning.
